Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
all weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 553. In this episode,
Scott talks with Woody Zul
about mob programming. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes
today. I have the pleasure
of chatting with Woody Zul
from mob programming.org. How are
you, sir? I'm doing great.
Scott. I love this name,
mob programming. I've done pair
programming. Why, what does mob
programming? Well, to make it
clear, the name itself was
just kind of a joke
that we used when we
referred to ourselves. And as
other people started hearing about
what we were doing, we
didn't change it. So if
you think about a mob
as being a group of
people who have gathered together
to take an action, to
do something, that's what we
are did. Is this something
that someone like very smart,
like went up on the
top of a mountain and
then came up with, and
then brought it down from
the mountain, or I wish
that I could take credit
for any of this, but
really what it's about is
the idea of a team
that took the time and
had the freedom to figure
out how they could work
well together. And so it's
really more about discuss a
path of discovery than it
is of somebody saying, here's
an idea. Let's try it.
It's an interesting thing to
me that, that this is
what's the beginning of it.
We weren't, there was nowhere
to read about it and
nowhere to find out about
it. It's just something that
happened to us. Do you
think that that's when kind
of the, the great ideas
happen that they are there?
They're there, they're out there,
like for example, Douglas Crockford
always talks about, you know,
the Jason JavaScript format being
uncovered or being discovered as
opposed to being invented. Yeah.
That's sort of exactly. The
idea is if you're open
to discovery, which means you
have to be paying attention
to little differences and little
hints of things, then you
know, then that innovation is
going to happen. You have
a chance edit anyway. And
if you open to the
universe. Yeah. Well, yeah, that's
one way to think of
it. You have to be
open to those things that
are already floating around that
are inside of us, that
we usually don't hear. You
know, we're not, there's too
much noise going on around
for us to pay attention
to those things. So what
was this team like and
what were you building? And
then how was this discovered?
Well, so basically I'd been
hired to be a manager
of a team or a
supervisor of a team. And
so when I came on,
there was certain things that
were really important to me
and I'd reviewed the code
and took a lot of
time to decide whether I
would want to work for
this company or not. And
for, with this team or
not. And once that was
all kind of worked through
where I understood what I
was getting myself into and
decided to go to work
with them. We basically had
a team of five or
six people that were working
essentially siloed on separate things.
So one developer would be
working on one project, another
developer on another project and
they'd assist each other whenever
it was necessary. But there
wasn't really the idea of
this was a team all
working on the same thing
with the same goals. Well,
they have interfaces that they
would share. I mean, it's
hit print. It sounds like
a pretty typical experience. Oh,
that's a really good point.
This, this was mostly internal
work and it was separate
projects that were used throughout
the company or different departments
of the company. So one
person might be working on
something for this department and
someone else was working somebody,
something for that department. So
they really weren't even working
on the same project a
lot of the time, sometimes
they were, but it's not
unusual, you know, software development
element of an it department
in, in many companies where
there's lots of internal need
for software that you just
can't buy and you need
to have it available somehow.
So you make it yourself.
Did the concept of pair
programming exist at this time?
So well within the company,
they weren't pair programming. Of
course, pair group programming itself
had been around a long
time. I joined this firm
in, let's see it was
2011 about April. So, you
know, pair programming had been
around in some form or
another since the late nineties.
And I was introduced to
it myself in 1999. And
once I got used to
working that way, it became
sort of my default way
of working after a while.
It was like, boy, if
I work with a pair,
I have less headaches. So
I prefer to work with
a pair. So that's basically
what it was. And that's
the thing I liked to
do, but I would never
tell somebody else, Hey, you
gotta work. You gotta do
pair programming. You know, it's
not the kind of thing
yet with demand ever, The
only time I've ever gotten
even close to any kind
of mob or coming up
with a group programming would
be during code reviews. How
did you all discover that
this was a useful thing?
Was it in the middle
of a code review? Oh,
that's a really interesting point,
but I have seen that
in code reviews, but that's
not what we were doing.
What had happened was once
I joined this firm, there's
a thing that's important to
me. And that's that we
study together that the, that
the group of people that
we call a team has
to find ways to interact
well as humans with each
other. And one way of
doing that, that I found
really, really works well is
to study together because we
don't have the pressure of
doing work that's with a
deliverable. And therefore we, we
can be more relaxed. We're
not feeling like it's one
person, you know, like your
job's gonna depend on you
getting this work done so
we can help each other
learn. And it's a different
interaction with each other. And
I believe that if you
take that and really take
it seriously, we're going to
study together. We're going to
practice together. Then we can
end up with a, we
can end up with a
work dynamic, or I should
say this study dynamic overflows
into our work dynamic. So
where we are usually under
pressure, when somebody comes to
us, you know, let's say
we're sitting in coding and
another team member comes over
and says, Hey, I'm working
on this thing and I
need some help with it.
And I think you're more
of an expert. Can you
spend some time with me?
Well, now we're distracting that
person from the work they
need to be getting done.
And the dynamic just isn't
really conducive to learning how
to work well together. It
says we're working together. It
sounds like you already had
a collaborative and fairly positive
nurturing environment, for lack of
a better word. Otherwise, people
who were learning together might
be afraid that they were
going to look bad. If
they didn't know something, it
didn't feel like a competition.
Yeah, that's really insightful because
that's one of the things
that happens a lot in
software you'll even see people
like a very proficient developer
might insist on doing something
their way, because that's what
they're being paid to do
is say, I know how
to do this, right? So
the environment, when I arrived
there, we were not doing
these study sessions. I was,
I think that I introduced
is let's open up every
Friday. Let's study for two
to three hours every Friday
and we would get together.
And rather than just get
out books and read them,
we're going to code together.
And we decided based on
a lot of experience, I've
had that let's use a
coding dojo style. I showed
him what it was, the
particular style we used is
sort of, they call Randori.
I'm not really sure why,
but the idea is somebody
is going to sit at
the computer. They're going to
take direction from another person.
And that person is standing
in the way we would
do it. And everyone else's
an observer and we would
use a timer. So every
four minutes the navigator would
become the driver. So that
means the person standing, giving
instructions would sit down at
the computer and become the
person receiving instructions, call that
person, the driver and the
next person in role becomes
the next navigator. So what
this requires is that everybody
pay attention. So when it
was their turn to navigate,
they have an idea of
where we're headed and what
we need to do next.
So they're kind of following
along, trying to pay attention
to everything that's so they
know the intent of what
we're doing. So by using
this little model of studying
together for writing code together,
we're usually working on simple
code. Katas like, Oh, tic
TAC, toe game, or the
bowling game, or any of
the, you know, Roman numerals
or any of the things
that you might do in
a study session. So that's
basically what we were doing.
We were, we spent, I
think almost six months, every
Friday for two to three
hours having a study session
together learning. So there will,
there's a lot of reasons.
I think it's important to
do it. We were learning
clean code approaches, like how
to split a large method
into smaller methods, how to
rename things, to make it
more understandable. So the code
can be more expressive and
things like that. So Just
to make sure that folks
that were listening are understanding
the word that you said
at the beginning though, to
make sure that they heard
that was Ren Dory, R
a N D O R
I a N a Randori
it's a term it's used
in Japanese martial arts indicate
freestyle practice. So you're, you're
working on a kata or
a series of problems and
you're just kind of switching
it up, right. You're moving
from the driver and the
copilot are changing. Yeah. So
actually, so if we think
of it, this way, the
person at the keyboard, their
job is to listen to
the instructions coming from the
navigator. And so we call
it a driver navigator, but
you could think of it
like a pilot in a
plane, the pilot in a
plane with a navigator, the
pilot may not know the
mission or the exact headings
or what route we're going
to take or anything like
that. They just have to
keep the plane flying. The
navigator is paying attention to
what heading do we need
to be on and so
on. And they're giving that
instruction as we go. As
a matter of fact, as
we're inventing the mission, because
in software, there's a lot
of discovery going on as
we're inventing how we're going
to solve this problem. That's
a big part of the
job of the navigator. What
are we going to do
next? And as we're rotating
through this, and we use
a very short timer about
four minutes. So the driver's
moving out of the driver's
seat and the navigators taking
that seat every four minutes,
a new person's navigating. So
it's requires that we it's,
they call it around Randori,
but I'm not really sure
if that's the model of
it in martial arts, I
don't do martial arts. So
this is just the terminology
that they've used in coding
dojo and things like that.
Yeah. I think it seems
to fit though. It does
sort of fit. So I,
if I was going to
be doing this, I think
that the idea of a
rotation is the way we
use it. So the word
I think of is a
rotation rather than a Randori
because the job of the
person at the keyboard is
to listen to whatever the
idea that we want to
code that's coming from the
navigator. So as soon as
he sit down at the
keyboard, you can stop thinking
about the problem space. And
you just thinking about translating
an idea into code and
the ideas coming from another
person, oddly, I should say,
although this wasn't our intention,
our intention was just to
have a good way of
learning together. We were learning
how to allow each other
to talk and learning how
to express ourselves better. So
that's where this started from.
If it was I've done
it, I think similar to
it in the past, like
lunchtime learnings where we'd sit
down, open up some code,
and this was at other
companies, open up some code
in the, in the company's
code base that everybody hated
working on. And we'd have
somebody at the keyboard and
the rest of us will
be talking about how to
make it better. And the
person at the keyboard would
just go ahead and make
it better, you know, based
on what the instructions that
were coming. So we'd done
this before over the last,
I don't know, 10 years
at other places I've worked,
but once I learned this
coding dojo style of the
Randori, I just loved it
so much. It really made
me feel excited and energized
whenever we did it. So
I've introduced it every chance
I get, if I'm at
a code camp or a
conference or a user group,
and the people want to
code, I introduced that. And
of course, a lot of
people are doing it. I
didn't invent it. A matter
of fact, I was shown
it by originally by Llewellyn
Falco, who learned it from
some other people who had
come up with some of
these ideas that the software
craftsmanship, community Paris. So it's
one of these ideas have
been floating around, but to
get to how this happened
for us, one day, we
had a big project that
we kind of put on
the back burner. It was
time to get working on
it. And the people who
were assigned to work on
it previously came to the
group and said, you know,
we want some help this
because cause a lot of
this coding here, we don't
quite understand and we're not
sure what steps to take
in may. We're going to
need everybody's help to work
on this thing. So we
got together in a regular
old fashioned meeting. That's where
people get together to share
some information and whatever it
is we need to talk
about. And then we analyze
it and discuss it. And
after we've done that, we
come up with some ideas
that lead to us, assigning
work to, and then going
off and doing that work.
So that's sort of a
one typical kind of a
meeting. And we gathered for
a meeting like that. But
a very interesting thing happened
as we start looking at
the code, somebody said something
to the effect of I'll
look at that. There's a
long method. Well, we know
how to fix that. We
can compose it. And so
they started navigating the person,
the board to go ahead
and do that work. And
as we did it, we
just start picking off things
in the code and fixing
it, using very similar techniques,
coding dojo. And after about
an hour and a half
of that, somebody came into
the room and said, Hey,
you guys have to leave
scheduled this room. Like you
always have in meeting rooms
in companies. And when that
happened, somebody on the team
almost instantly said, let's go
find another room. That's a
really, for concept two things
happen there. And I say
almost three things happened there.
One was, we noticed some
problems in the code and
this wasn't something that team
was necessarily ready to do
six months earlier, but we've
been studying clean code concepts
for six months. So now
when they looked at code
that could say, Oh, there's
a problem there. We should
fix it. The second thing
was, they knew how to
fix it. Using this model
of communicating out loud, your
idea, and somebody else translating
it into code. When you
do that, it re it,
it makes everybody on the
team aware of what we're
doing and movements that are
being made. And anyone on
the team when you don't
do it as a round
Dory can just pitch in
at any time and say,
Oh wait, gotta change that
thing down there. Or you
need to work on this
so we can be we're
collaborating now. But the bigger
thing was we noticed that
this was working well for
us and somebody on the
team said, let's go find
another room. So that's what
we actually did. We found
a room there's 10 or
20 rooms across the company.
Went to that room, worked
for another couple hours till
we had to leave there.
But a funny thing also
happened as soon as we
got to the other room,
someone else on the team
said, well, why don't we
just book rooms for the
rest of the day? So
that the team was expressing
the intent that this was
working. So we thought, well,
why don't we just do
it at the end of
the first meeting? They could,
somebody could have said, okay,
let's go back to work
at our cubicles on this
stuff that we started working
on. But rather they said,
let's keep working together. So
that's sort of the discovery
process had happened. We started
out studying together. It grew
into one day we had
enough experience working together. One
day, we all just, all
of a sudden found working
together was actually a good
thing to try and we
didn't want to stop. So
that night we actually, every
evening at the end of
every day, we would do
many retrospective. And at the
end of that day, everybody
said, well, that worked really
well. Let's do it again
tomorrow. So we did it
again the next day. At
the end of that day,
we kind of decided to
try it all week. So
this little team basically just
said, we like this. Let's
keep going. And that's a
concept. I call turnip the
good, which I think I
learned from Kent Beck, from
reading his book on extreme
programming explained in that book.
It's about, he had all
these practices. He knew were
good. He pictured them as
the knobs on a control
board, like volume control board.
And what if I turned
each of them up? How
high could I turn them
up? And I think of
that as being turned up
the good. So it's one
of the things we've been
learning all along over the
last six months when we
first started learning these things.
And I think we just
automatically got to the point
where we were doing that.
So we turn up the
good on something we noticed
was good and we just
kept doing it. That was
literally five years ago. I
believe this month. And we've
continued working together as a
team every day, since then
just went from going from
meeting room to meeting room,
to finding a permanent spot.
And then once we found
a permanent spot, we moved
to a, a larger spot.
And now the team there
has grown to six teams
all working this way. They
have a large work area.
Now we had just one
team before This episode of
Hansel minutes is brought to
you by Braintree payments. Why
make payment integration more difficult
than it has to be?
Braintree's powerful. Full stack payment
platform allows you to accept
nearly any type of payment
from any device. With one
integration, it's flexible to your
system's needs, supports most programming
languages. So whether you're using
Java, Ruby, or Python, you'll
always have a range of
service side and client side
SDKs available. Braintree makes payments
and your job a whole
lot easier. You can learn
more@braintreepayments.com slash Hanselman that's Braintree
payments.com/hanselman. Okay, well let me,
let me ask a couple
of precise questions that came
up in my mind. Is
that okay? Absolutely. So how
many people is too many
people? When does this not
scale? Is it like I
used to use the term
two pizza teams, the size
of the team that could
eat two pizzas, but not
bigger. Well, so for starters,
we had one guy on
the team who could easily
eat both those pizzas. Okay.
Well, that's, that's not that
I worked with us, however,
you know, but clearly this
is an important matter of
fact, there's two questions that
are always asked when I
first introduced this topic and
that's one of them. Here's
the thing. It's not about
the exact size of the
team. It's about the need
for us to work well
on things. And what are
the things that, that hampers
teams from working well is
when they get a question
that's blocking the team. So
if we're working along and
we get a question that
the team can't answer themselves,
that's a hint that there's
somebody else that belongs on
this team because it's, as
if we can answer all
questions within a minute or
two of when they come
up, we can just keep
rolling throughout the day. There's
something I've noticed over the
years. And I call it
question queue time. If you're
working on coding something, let's
say you're working alone and
you come to something, you
need to ask the guy
on the team that maybe
is an expert on the
database. Now you have a
blocking question because you can't
continue working until you get
the answer. You go to
their desk to get the
answer and Oh, they're not
there right now. So you
send them an email, they
send back a note saying,
well, yeah, I can, I
can help you, but I'm
really busy today. How about
tomorrow morning? So all of
a sudden we have a
four hour period until the
next day, you know, and
the next morning that til
we can get the answer.
So when we work as
a team, the mob programming
team, one of the big
benefits is that we can
answer each other's questions immediately.
We're all in the same
context. And it's all of
our job to get this
particular thing we're working on
done rather than I'm working
on this thing. You're working
on that thing. So, so
to guess what would be
a good size for the
team? I think if we
watch, if we're getting blocked
on questions, maybe we don't
have the right number or
the right mix for the
team. We want to have
every question that comes out
answered quickly. That means we
want to have testers on
the team and we want
to have a quality mindset
while we're working on it.
And that comes with the
testing mindset. We want to
have the product expert on
the team. So somebody who
really has a passion for
what is this thing supposed
to do when we're done
with it. And actually the
product person kind of has
the vision or the, they
have an idea of what
they would like to have
happen. The team kind of
knows the reality of what
we can make happen. And
the QA people are the
testers. They know whether it
really does it or not,
and how you would go
about getting that done. So
if we bring all those
people together and work at
the same time, then we
can all answer each other's
questions as we go. Instead
of in some kind of
a phased approach where we
give the work, get the
work from a product owner,
work on it, give it
to a tester. We're not
really helping each other in
real time. So that's one
way. Another thing is if
you feel as a team
member that you're contributing or
you're learning, then this is
a good team to be
on. But if you don't
really feel, you're like you're
contributing and you don't feel
like you're learning cloth and
work on something alone, find
a pair to work with,
or maybe go work with
another team. So the size
of the team is going
to grow and shrink based
on the needs that we
have. And typically it's going
to be four to six
people, but there's no reason
that you couldn't have 10
or 15 people. We were
working on a very critical
thing for a couple of
days and it found we
kept getting blocking questions and
we kept, as we would
contact the people could answer
them. We'd ask them to
come and spend a little
time with us maybe a
day or two, because this
was very critical to the
company that we get this
done quickly. By having everybody
there for a day or
two, we got through the
work really quickly. Everybody was
acting as a navigator, but
not everybody has to act
as a driver. Not everybody
has to take the keyboard.
You take the keyboard. If
you feel comfortable taking the
keyboard, you feel that you
can contribute well taking the
keyboard, but everybody who's there
should be navigating their need
for having them there is
because they can contribute to
what it is we're building.
Well, that brings up an
interesting point. Like you said,
the need to have them
there because when I asked
how many people is too
many, there's actually a couple
of underlying questions there. There's
when are those people just
taking up space, you know,
is, is the issue of
there being too many people
in the room being that
one or more people is
not providing any value or
is not receiving any value.
And then like, like you
couldn't, could you mob program
with 200 people? Probably not,
but there must be an
upper bound that me thinking
about the, the optimal ratio
of people and, you know,
X number of people, times
their hourly rate, that's a
lot of money to maximum
output. Okay. So now you've
come to the second question.
People always ask, how can
this possibly be productive with
five people working at one
computer? Okay. So when we
first started, we just had
the team we had, we
didn't, it wasn't like what's
the right size. It's just,
we had, I think we
had six people. I don't
remember right at the moment,
five or six people. What's
the right number. Well, this
was the people we had
and often in companies, that's
what you have is whatever
you have, as far as
productivity, productivity is a trick
concept. I can be highly
productive, producing something nobody wants.
So there is always the
idea of effect. Are we
working on the right thing,
which is always more important
than working on efficiently on
getting something done. So part
of having the whole team
there is that we can
steer much quicker to the
right thing. We never start
knowing what's the right thing
to be working. We've discovered
that as we do the
work and as we discover
that we want to be
able to quickly get feedback
as to whether this thing
is, is the right thing
to be working on or
not. So at what point
does it drop off? As
far as productivity goes, I
would say a better question
then how can five people
be productive working at a
single computer, that question over
and ask, how can we
be productive if we separate
the people who should be
working together? Oh, gee, you
look, and you just flipped
it right there. That that
was a, that's a great
answer. Yeah. And that took
me several years to figure
out. So don't get the
idea. The first time I
was asked, this question was
the first time, or actually
I'd been asked it several
times, but the first time
I was asked at
a in giving a talk
about, this was the first
time I gave the talk
about this, the fruit, the
two things always ask. And
so I wrote them down
and I said, I better
be prepared to answer those
questions. But the answer that
I gave the first time
I was asked, how can
five people be productive at
one computer? My response was,
I don't does that matter
because it doesn't matter if
we can be productive. What
matters is that we noticed
whether we are productive or
not. And if we notice
that we were, and that's
what the team was noticing,
dang, in this first day,
we got a lot done.
We all felt like we
learned a lot. And we
were getting through a project
that had been a problem
for the company. And we
were all getting to an
understanding of a project that
we probably would end up
needing everybody's brain power on.
So yeah, so now, but
we got to take this
a step further if you
don't mind that. So here's
the thing. There's a guy
named Peter block. He's, he's
a great author about software
development and more about consulting.
I'm not sure if it's
his talk he's anything about
software development, just knowledge work
and things like that. And
he has a saying, and
I I'm going to code
it, quoted off the cuff
because I don't have it
front of me. But he
says basically a transformation comes
more from pursuing profound questions
rather than seeking practical answers.
So if we pursue profound
questions, what usually happens is
we just come up with
better questions and the better,
the questions, the better thinking
we're going to end up
being able to do. And
what I've found is if
we're driving for answers, what
we usually get when we
drive for an answer is
just the seeds of our
next problem. So since we
have an answer to something,
all we're doing is introducing
some things are going to
become a problem for us
soon. We didn't, we didn't
delve in it deep enough
to really come to the
profound things we need to
do. So I started asking
that question as we started
pondering this, this is what
we came up with. Sure.
We can ask, how could
this be productive? But what's
the real root of this.
Or one step towards root
of it is to ask
what are the things that
destroy productivity. If we could
get a handle on understanding
about the things that destroy
productivity, then we can understand
why is it more productive
to separate people? Because if
the things that destroy productivity
are there, because the people
are too close to each
other and they're working together,
then we would have a
reason to separate people. So,
or to have them working
together. So instead of asking
the question, how can this
one way or that one
way be more productive. Let's
talk about the things that
destroy productivity. So when I
asked that question of groups
and I've gotten probably two
or 300 answers to this,
some of the typical things
are bugs, destroy productivity. Soon
as we have to work
on a bug, I'm now
no longer working on my
code that I needed to
deliver. Another thing is meetings.
I was at a place
just a couple of month
ago or so. And I
asked the team of developers,
you know, how much time
do you get a day
to code? And they said
about an hour and a
half. So what do you
spend the rest of your
time doing we're in meetings?
Well, what are those meetings?
Well, they're about the work
we're going to do. They're
going to, they're about a
project we might do next
year. And they're about reviewing
the stuff we've already done.
Giving pro progress reports, so
on and so on. So
another thing that often comes
up is hard to read
code. Another thing is interruptions.
Another thing is context switching.
And then one that is
almost present everywhere. Is that
question queue time, I can't
get an answer to something
that's blocking me the information
I need. I don't even
know who has that information.
So once we start delving
into what are the things
that destroy productivity to me,
this is a key thing.
And that is this. When
we started working well as
a group, turning up the
good on working well together,
a lot of the things
that destroy productivity faded away
for us, we didn't try
to solve any of those
problems. We just having those
problems turning up the good
on working well together, got
rid of a lot of
the problems that block teams.
So that was a real
eye opener for us. It
had very little for us
to saying, well, here's a
problem we need to solve.
And here's a problem we
need to solve. Like, Oh,
we have this question queue
time. How do we solve
for that would be one
example, or we're always getting
context switching. So how do
we solve for that? In
the old days, it would
be, you got to go
to the change control board
before you can get a
change made to this software
and things like that. So
we got the reverse of
this. We just, all those
problems, I should say, many
of those problems faded away
for us. So it was
kind of like we didn't
set out to invent that
and we didn't put that
in place. It just happened
for us. Do you think
that mob programming is something
that the people who are
listening should explore, is this
for everyone? Or do they
require some, some minimal skills
or minimal kinds of personalities?
Or do you really think
it's just to give it
a try and if it
fits, try, continue to try
it. Yeah. That's a good
question because this isn't something
that you just can automatically
be good at. It's like
if you took four teenagers
and they want to have
a rock and roll band,
and none of them have
ever played a musical instrument
before, we've got a lot
of stuff we need to
learn to do before we
can even discover whether we're
going to have a decent
band that can even play
anywhere except our garage, you
know, and garage bands are
great by the way. So
I don't want to be
a little loud at all,
but you get the picture.
It's like, yeah, this isn't
something you just say, Oh,
we're all going to be
automatically good at working with
each other. So one of
the things that we noticed
for ourselves after working for
a couple months was we
were getting on each other's
nerves. You know, you work
with somebody all day long,
every day, where you've used
to protecting yourself from the
nonsense of the workplace, by
working alone. Well, now you
don't have that hiding spot
anymore. So whether you're an
extrovert or an introvert, whether
you're a highly technical capable
person or someone who's just
learning, there's a place for
you on a team, but
we have to learn techniques
and ways to work with
this. So it just doesn't
turn into a, a problem
for everyone. So we noticed
that for ourselves, that we
were actually getting on each
other's nerves. So that the
first step we would always
do when we notice something,
anything is we would try
to found the, find the
profound question to ask about
it. And this is the
question we decided to ask
each other. Let me see
if I can phrase it.
Well, how would you like
to be treated by your
coworkers? Let's write that down
as a one word thing
on a post it note,
and everybody write as many
of those one word post
it notes. Am I allowed
to say post to note,
I should say sticky notes,
sticky notes. And we're going
to gather them about the
board. And we're going to
do an affinity grouping by
grouping, by theme these words
and see if we can
come up with some words
about how we want to
be treated. We came up
with some words and the
three that we settled on
was we need to, we
want to be treated with
kindness, consideration and respect. And
so once we did that,
we had to ask each
other, well, how do we
do that? Because we clearly
weren't already doing it or
else maybe we wouldn't have
these problems. So we kind
of made a pact with
each other. We're going to
pretend to treat each other
with kindness, consideration, respect. Let's
do that for a day
and see what that feels
like. And if we could
do that for a day
or two, then maybe we
could learn how to go
beyond that. And that's what
we did. So we actually
made this little rule for
ourselves. I don't know if
a rule is the right
thing, but we're going to
try and learn to treat
each other with kindness, consideration
and respect. So if you
bring a bunch of people
together who are already working
on a team, but they
don't necessarily work really well
with each other already, then
they need to build those
skills. And we had been
doing our coding dojo for
six months, which was basically
us learning how to work
well together. We just didn't
know that's what we were
doing, because the weird thing
about the coding dojo is
the rules that we would
follow is the only person
allowed to talk is the
navigator. So you have to
save your ideas up until
it's your turn to talk.
And that teaches you how
to stay, how to have
a stillness and how to
be quiet for awhile and
keep your train of thought.
So when it's your turn
to inject an idea, you
can, now we don't work
that way. That's how the
coding dojo worked. When we
work, anybody can speak at
any time, we have to
be noticing that someone else
it's their turn to talk,
let them finish what their
ideas, and then you can
bring forward your idea. And
that means we have to
start getting good at trying
other people's ideas. We have
to learn to express our
own ideas, listen to the
other ideas, and then try
other people's ideas. These are
not necessarily easy things for
programmers to do, who are
used to saying, I know
how to do this, or
this is the way we
should do it. Let's analyze
all of this first and
decide on that. So can
everybody do this? My roundabout
answer kind of is I
think so, but we need
to practice it, but it's
certainly worth exploring. I would
never recommend it. Say your
company, you should do this,
but I could say, Hey,
it's a fun thing. Set
aside a half a day
and give it a whirl.
It's kind of fun. People
are trying to all over
the place. Very cool. Well,
people can learn about mob
programming@mobprogramming.org. And there's a link
there to lean pub.com/mob programming,
where people can put some
money in and encourage you
and Kevin Meadows to finish your
book on mob programming. Yeah,
we're working on a chapter
right now. It's probably going
to be the last chapter.
We have one or two
more to do, but the
book could be purchased. Cause
lean pub's model is to
make the book available before
it's done and sort of
in a lean way. And
we're working on doing this
remotely. So there's a lot
of teams that are doing
that to teams. Aren't actually
sitting in the same room.
They're, they're sitting at their
computers in different parts of
the world and still working
together at the same time
using some kind of virtual
environment. So that's a chapter
we're working on. We've been
doing it for about a
year and a half ourselves.
And we're trying to get
some guidelines about how you
can work remotely working this
way. Very cool. Well, thanks
so much for chatting with
me today. Oh, thank you,
Scott. I had a great
time. This has been another
episode of Hansel minutes and
we'll see you again next
week.